We have identified DLC-1 as a new gene required for proper apoptotic signalling between somatic cells and germ cells in response to IR acting through KRI-1. Our study is thus adding to the knowledge of the recently described KRI-1-mediated response to IR. Firstly, we find that KRI-1 is required for CED-3-dependent apoptosis induced by RNAi against dlc-1 . Secondly, our data show that DLC-1 regulates the level of KRI-1. Thirdly, we show that the DLC-1/KRI-1 signalling pathway operates via EGL-1 and CED-13. Based upon these results we propose a model in which DLC-1 is part of the response to IR-induced apoptosis through a cell-nonautonomous pathway depending on kri-1 and independent of cep-1 ( Figure 6 ). Consistent with this model we found that IR did not induce additional apoptosis in dlc-1(RNAi) animals. Our results strongly support that intercellular communication between somatic cells and germ cells is required for proper regulation of the cell-killing process. The clear involvement of DLC-1 in somatic tissues in regulating germ cell apoptosis led us to investigate a possible involvement of kri-1 . The KRI-1 ankyrin-repeat protein is orthologous to the human KRIT1/CCM1, and it is required for IR-induced apoptosis in a novel pathway acting in somatic cells. 16 We examined the epistatic relationship between dlc-1 and kri-1 by treating kri-1(ok1251) mutants with RNAi against dlc-1 . kri-1 mutants fed dlc-1 RNAi had significantly fewer apoptotic germ cells than wild-type N2 animals treated with RNAi against dlc-1 ( Figure 5c ). This indicates that kri-1 is necessary for dlc-1(RNAi) -induced apoptosis. Next, we used a strain expressing the functional KRI-1::GFP protein to examine whether dlc-1 could regulate the expression or localisation of KRI-1. We treated KRI-1::GFP animals with dlc-1 RNAi for 3 days and scored the expression of GFP compared with animals grown on control RNAi. Our results show that dlc-1 RNAi increases the expression of KRI-1::GFP on average with 57% ( Figure 5d ), demonstrating that dlc-1 can regulate KRI-1. We did not observe any change in localisation of KRI-1::GFP because of RNAi against dlc-1 ( Supplementary Figure S9 ). To test the possibility that DLC-1 and KRI-1 might interact directly, we expressed C. elegans DLC-1 and KRI-1 in a mammalian two-hybrid system using luciferase as readout. As DLC-1 is known to bind to itself in mammalian cells, we used this interaction as a positive control ( Figure 5e ). However, we did not observe any interaction between DLC-1 and KRI-1 ( Figure 5f ). Based upon our results we propose that DLC-1 is regulating KRI-1 in response to IR-induced apoptosis to mediate a pro-apoptotic signal from somatic cells to germ cells ( Figure 6 ).