Myeloid differentiation factor 88 (MyD88) is a common adapter molecule for the signal pathways mediated by Toll-like receptor (TLR) family members, with the exception of TLR3 [ 24 ]. TLRs are innate immune signal receptors that sense extracellular and endosomal, but not cytoplasmic, danger molecules. As they cannot invade the cytosol of cells after being ingested by Kupffer cells, heat-killed P. acnes is thought to be recognized by extracellular/endosomal sensor TLRs. Therefore, it is plausible that Myd88 −/− mice do not develop hepatic granulomas after P. acnes treatment [ 23 , 25 ]. Indeed, mice deficient in TLR9, which utilizes MyD88 for signaling, are somewhat resistant to P. acnes -induced hepatic granulomatous changes [ 26 ], suggesting the importance of TLR9-MyD88 pathway for the development of P. acnes -induced hepatic granuloma formation. The TLR/MyD88-mediated pathway activates nuclear factor-kappa B (NF-κB) to induce gene expression of various molecules, including interleukin (IL) 12. It is conceivable that the introduction of NF-κB decoy oligodeoxynucleotides in the liver protects against P. acnes -induced hepatic granuloma formation, and the resultant morbidity and mortality, after subsequent challenge with a subclinical dose of LPS [ 27 ]. Il12 −/− mice are also resistant to P. acnes treatment in terms of hepatic granuloma formation and the acquisition of LPS sensitization [ 18 , 28 ]. As IL-12 is a potent interferon (IFN)-γ-inducing factor, IFN-γ expression seems to also be involved in this phenomenon. Indeed, Ifn-γ −/− mice do not show these host responses to P. acnes at all [ 18 , 29 ]. Furthermore, P. acnes treatment renders wild-type mice highly susceptible to tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF), in terms of morbidity and mortality, similar to P. acnes /LPS-induced illness [ 18 ]. Intriguingly, P. acnes -induced sensitization to TNF also depends on IL-12 and IFN-γ expression [ 18 ]. Collectively, the TLR-MyD88-IL-12-IFN-γ axis is required for the development of P. acnes -induced hepatic granuloma formation and the resultant sensitization to LPS and TNF ( Figure 2 ). As mentioned previously, Kupffer cells play a critical role in the P. acnes -induction of LPS sensitization and Con A-induced severe hepatitis by activating hepatic granuloma formation and inducing TF expression, respectively ( Figures 2 and 6 ). In contrast to those models of acute liver injuries, Kupffer cells have been reported to negatively regulate APAP-induced acute liver injury. The liver injury in Kupffer cell-ablated mice was more severe than that in Kupffer cell-sufficient control mice [ 67 – 69 ]. Kupffer cells play several protective roles. After APAP challenge, various anti-inflammatory cytokines such as IL-4, IL-13, and IL-10 are produced, as well as proinflammatory cytokines such as IL-1β and IL-18 [ 64 , 70 ]. Kupffer cell-ablated mice displayed impaired induction of IL-10 and IL-18-binding protein (BP) following APAP treatment [ 67 ]. As the IL-18 BP serves as a natural antagonist of IL-18 with a higher affinity for IL-18 than the affinity of IL-18 receptor (IL-18R) for IL-18 [ 71 ], reduction of IL-18 binding protein (IL-18 BP) induction might conceivably result in the development of more severe liver injury [ 64 ]. Il10 −/− mice are highly susceptible to APAP-induced liver injury [ 70 ], suggesting that Kupffer cells might negatively regulate inflammation by producing IL-10 as well. In addition to the production of anti-inflammatory molecules, Kupffer cells are capable of repairing liver injury. Kupffer cells isolated from APAP-treated mice expressed significantly higher levels of angiogenesis-associated molecules than those from untreated mice. In fact, upon APAP treatment, Kupffer cell-ablated mice showed prolonged vascular leakage in their livers when compared with Kupffer cell-sufficient normal mice [ 68 , 69 ]. Thus, Kupffer cells play a beneficial role in APAP-induced liver injury by producing anti-inflammatory molecules and pro-angiogenic factors.