This genomic analysis focuses on the accumulation of genetic variants within the genes instead of individual variants. From our results, we can conclude that suicide is unlikely caused by a single gene, instead, it may be either an umbrella disease-like disorder caused by multiple high-penetrance genes, or it may be determined by the concerted action of multiple genes and the environment. We detected rare genetic variants, which potentially could be the causes of suicide. We emphasize the potential significance of the three calcium ion channel genes (CACNA1B, -1C, and -2D4), which we identified in two different analyses. The CACNA1A, another calcium channel gene, has also been proposed by others as a candidate gene for MDD 35 . This report also identified several candidate genes that have not been associated with any diseases until now. Additionally, our study also revealed that the TGF-β signalling pathway may play a causative role in the completed suicide (Fig. 1 ), which is a confirmation of earlier studies that proposed a role for TGF-β in MDD 40 – 44 . Members of the TGF-β superfamily have been shown to play an important role in the formation of synapses and neural development in invertebrates 50 , 51 and in vertebrates 38 , 52 as well. Alteration in TGF-β signalling may also shift the balance of pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines, as proposed in MDD 39 . However, since no other controls (non-suicide MDD patients and non-MDD suicide victims) were used in this study, the identified candidate genes and the TGF-β signalling pathway may be general genetic factors for the depression or for the suicide, instead of having potential exclusive roles for the completed suicide in MDD patients. Of the 201 genes implicated by our analyses, 191 genes had an entry in the STRING database. 88 out of the 191 genes were interconnected; while 20 genes had interactions with experimental evidence forming a network as shown in Figs S1 and S2 . The biggest hub in this network was SMAD3.The Enrichment Analysis function on the Gene Ontology (GO) website was used to identify gene sets from the obtained candidate genes, which cluster into gene networks. Four genes belonging to the transforming growth factor beta (TGF-β) signalling pathway have been found to be enriched (p = 0.0225; with α = 0.01 following Bonferroni correction) in the dataset obtained from the analysis of region-dependent accumulation of rare variants. Genes NREP, SMAD3, HIPK2 and PRDM16 are all members of the TGF-β pathway and the regulation of cellular response to TGF-β (Fig. 1 ). The SMAD3 is a transcriptional modulator, while the rest of the genes code for transcription factors. We have identified mutations in the 3′-UTRs of the SMAD3; HIPK2; and PRDM16 in 4–4 subjects each. Mutations of the NREP gene are accumulated in the splice region in six subjects. Note that SMAD3 is a hub protein with multiple interactions (Fig. S1 ), and that NREP directly acts on TGF-β. Figure 1 NREP, HIPK2, PRDM16, SMAD3 and their roles in the canonical TGF-β signalling pathway. The region-dependent accumulation of rare variants dataset was significantly enriched in the genes connected to the TGF-β pathway. Highlighted are the four genes contained in the dataset. Interactions were drawn using Pathvisio 3.2.4.