In cluster/module1, cluster/module2 and cluster/module3, we observe the interactions between PI3K-Akt and kinase signaling such as ERBB2 , EGFR and ERBB4 . In the last module/cluster 4, enrichment of PI3K-Akt signaling, JAK-STAT and calcium signaling suggests activation of PI3K-Akt signaling through both calcium and stress-activated protein Jun kinases and vice versa. In the past, researchers portrays the role of intracellular Ca2+ and disturbances in its cellular concentration, with respect to tumor initiation, angiogenesis, progression and metastasis in the normal cells [ 24 ]. To delve further into the relationship between Ras and PI3K-Akt signaling, we extracted the constituent genes/nodes from regulatory interactions within module 0, and we observed interesting relationship among them, as shown in Table 3 . The regulatory interactions among these genes (Fig. 5 ) show that important constituent genes in PI3K-Akt signaling are regulated by the genetic components of Ras signaling pathway. In some cases, common genes regulate both pathways, exhibiting higher level of cross-talk between them. It is worth noting that perturbation of CDH1 leads to the 4 fold decrease in the expression of YWHAZ gene, which is a member of the 14-3-3 protein family and a central hub protein for many signal transduction pathways. YWHAZ gene regulates apoptotic pathways critical to cell survival and plays a key role in a number of cancers and neuro-degenerative diseases [ 25 ]. This gene is a well-known target for cancer therapy (14-3-3 zeta as novel molecular target for cancer therapy). Hence CDH1 could be a potential gene as a molecular target for cancer therapy. Fig. 5 Interesting gene regulatory interactions with respect to PI3K-Akt signaling and Ras signaling pathway. PI3K-Akt signaling components are represented by oval shape. Genes involved in Ras signaling are represented by rectangular shape. Yellow color represent the perturbed genes involved in both signaling pathway. In this figure, we have shown the PI3K-Akt enriched genes in red color, while the genes enriched in Ras pathway are represented by rectangular shape. The yellow color represents the genes which undergoes perturbation experiments to obtain the gene-gene regulatory network. The edges with arrow signs represent the four fold increase in the expression of target/effected genes, while edges with dot represent the four fold down-regulation Table 3 Genes enriched in PI3K-Akt and Ras signaling Signaling pathway Genes PI3K-Akt YWHAZ,COL4A5,SGK1,ITGB5,TSC2,LAMA2, PTEN,GRB2,PP2R3A Ras signaling pathway CDH1,HRAS,CALM1,FGFR3,KDR,AKT1,FGFR4, Rap1A,PRKC1 PI3k-AKT and Ras signaling HRAS,KDR,FGFR3,AKT1,FGFR2,FGFR4