The results of the research presented herein show that ChPL induces apoptosis in breast cancer cells through MAP kinase signaling inhibition and activation of the mitochondria-mediated pathway involving Mcl-1 downregulation ( Figure 6 ). The activity of ChPL was comparable to that of its precursor, plumbagin. PL is an extensively researched naphthoquinone with promising anti-cancer potential. Plumbagin has been reported to selectively inhibit the proliferation of breast cancer cells and suppress breast tumor xenograft growth in mice ( Kuo et al., 2006 ). In the present research, ChPL displayed similar activity toward breast cancer cells as plumbagin. The therapeutic potential of ChPL can be emphasized by the lower cytotoxicity of ChPL toward non-tumorigenic, epithelial MCF 10A cells in comparison to plumbagin. Furthermore, in the presented research, ChPL displayed higher activity toward triple negative breast cancer cells, MDA-MB-468, which is the most aggressive breast cancer subtype. Since the expression of MCL-1 in triple negative breast cancer is high, the ability of ChPL to decrease Mcl-1 levels in MDA-MB-468 cells points to its promising potential in breast cancer treatment. Moreover, ChPL inhibited both the Mcl-1 and Bcl-2 arm of the anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 family proteins, which is important in minimizing drug resistance occurrence. These findings encourage further investigation into the anticancer potential of ChPL, specifically toward breast cancer cells. The involvement of MAPK signaling inhibition in ChPL-mediated apoptosis induction was examined by silencing the expression of ERK in MDA-MB-468 and MCF-7 cells and determining the potential of ChPL to induce apoptosis in these cells. Cells were transiently transfected with ERK siRNA or control, scrambled siRNA and 24 h following transfection, Western blot analysis was performed to determine ERK levels and verify transfection efficacy. The results of Western blot analysis revealed decreased levels of ERK in MCF-7 and MDA-MB-468 cells transfected with ERK siRNA in comparison with cells transfected with control siRNA ( Figure 5A , Supplementary Figure 5 ). To determine the role of ERK in ChPL-mediated apoptosis induction, 24 h post-transfection breast cancer cells were treated with ChPL for 24 h and apoptosis induction was assessed with Annexin V-PE staining. In cells with reduced ERK expression levels, an increase in the percentage of apoptotic was observed in both cell lines. Furthermore, cells with silenced ERK expression were significantly more sensitive to treatment with ChPL in comparison with control cells, transfected with scrambled siRNA ( Figure 5B ). The role of ERK in ChPL-mediated Mcl-1 inhibition was further examined. Similarly to the results obtained with Annexin V staining, Western blot analysis of Mcl-1 expression levels revealed a reduction of Mcl-1 in cells with silenced ERK expression. The treatment of cells with ChPL reduced Mcl-1 levels to a greater extent in cells transfected with ERK siRNA than in control cells ( Figure 5C , Supplementary Figure 6 ), indicating the involvement of ERK in ChPL-mediated Mcl-1 inhibition.