Unlike Foxp3+ iTreg cell differentiation, Th17 cell development induced by TGF-beta and IL-6 requires the JNK and p38 MAPKs pathways. As shown in Fig. 6D and 6E, addition of the p38 inhibitor, especially the JNK inhibitor, markedly inhibited Th17 cell development. Conversely, the addition of an ERK inhibitor did not attenuate Th17 cell production in this setting (Fig. 6D, 6E). In addition, IL-6 and TGF-beta had a decreased ability to induce CD4+ cells from JNK2 KO mice to become Th17 cells, although Th17 cell differentiation by CD4+ cells from ERK1 KO mice was intact (Fig. 6F). Similarly, the addition of JNK and p38 inhibitors equivalently suppressed Th17 cell production in vitro in CD4+ cells from both WT and Smad3 KO mice (Fig. 6E), suggesting a SMAD3-independent role for the JNK and p38 MAPK pathways in Th17 cell induction. The addition of JNK, ERK, and p38 inhibitors did not alter the T cell activation, because >90% of these cells expressed CD25 (Fig. 6E) and total viable cell numbers (data not shown). In addition, these MAPK inhibitors did not affect the anti-CD3/CD28-stimulated CD4+ cell proliferation (Fig. 6G). Thus, Th17 suppression by JNK and p38 inhibitors is not due to global T cells suppression. In fact, others have previously reported that Smad4 is not essential for Th17 development, although it significantly contributes to TGF-beta-primed Foxp3+ cell induction. Moreover, injection of a p38 inhibitor significantly suppressed EAE development (Fig. 7A) and Th17 cell production in regional lymph nodes (Fig. 7B, 7C). This helps to explain why injection of a p38 inhibitor can prevent the onset and progression of collagen-induced arthritis, another Th17 cell-mediated disease. A schematic model for the role of TGF-beta signaling pathways in iTreg and Th17 cell development has been suggested (Fig. 8). We summarize our finding in a paradigm shown in Fig. 8. TGF-beta signaling has a profound regulatory effect on lymphocyte differentiation and conversion, depending on the subset of lymphocytes and costimulated cytokines. Simultaneous stimulation in CD4+ cells by TGF-beta and IL-2 activates both SMAD-independent and SMAD-dependent pathways to promote iTreg cell generation, whereas combined TGF-beta and IL-6 signaling activates cell conversion from CD4+ and even nTreg cells to Th17 cells through SMAD-independent pathways. Foxp3 expression can suppress RORgammat+ cells from conversion to Th17 cells, but IL-6 signaling pathway molecules, such as STAT3 and SMAD7, also have a negative feedback on Foxp3+ induced regulation differentiation. 