These initial observations require further study to (1) define relationships of P-S6K activation to enhanced mitogenesis and (2) identify mediating upstream regulators, potentially members of the mTOR complex 1 family. Indeed, extracellular mitogens promote mTOR signaling, which acts through S6K and eIF4B to promote cell proliferation. eIF4B phosphorylation by S6K in turn is growth-factor dependent and important for promoting ribosome-mRNA binding, and consequent growth and proliferation. Significantly, Engrailed 2 protein has previously been shown to bind eIF4E. Thus, Engrailed 2 may interact with other members of the eIF4 family, such as eIF4B, providing a mechanism through which En2 alters downstream mTOR signaling. This might explain the increases in IGF1-induced proliferation we observe both in vitro and in vivo. However, what underlies the increased IGF1-induced S6K phosphorylation in En2 KO cells? Independent of Akt-mTOR signaling, IGF1 activates through PI3K the 3-phosphoinositide-dependent protein kinase 1 (PDK1), which is known to phosphorylate S6K (Figure 7). Thus, PDK1 is a candidate in addition to mTOR for further study. Furthermore, since S6K itself negatively regulates IGF1 signaling by phosphorylating the insulin response substrate 1 (IRS1), En2 may disrupt this inhibitory feedback loop, leading to increased S6K phosphorylation and activation via mTOR-dependent and -independent pathways downstream of PI3K. Thus, our data suggest En2 may function normally to attenuate mTOR-mediated proliferation in a growth factor-rich environment, though the mechanisms by which this may occur remain to be explored. En2 modulates IGF1's pleiotropic effects in GNPs, potentially through altered S6 kinase activation. While En2 expression appeared to have no effect on IGF1 activation of the PI3K pathway at the level of Akt phosphorylation, the absence of En2 caused increased phosphorylation of S6 kinase. Thus, we propose a model in which En2 expression in postnatal GNPs promotes differentiation and inhibits proliferation via disruption of S6 kinase activation, a well-characterized promitogenic signal. Potential targets for En2 may include PDK1 and mTORC1, which directly phosphorylate S6K, though these interactions remain to be explored. Alternatively, En2 may alter feedback inhibition between the S6K and the PI3K pathway. Dashed lines signify indirect pathways. Arrows and (+) indicate activation. Flat head and (-) indicate inhibition. GNP = Granule neuron precursor. IGF1R = Insulin-like growth factor-1 receptor. P = Phosphorylation. In addition to altered mitogenesis, En2 KO GNPs grew fewer neurites in response to neuritogenic factors, IGF1 and PACAP, though their combination synergistically overcame differentiation deficits. Decreased IGF1-induced neuritogenesis was not merely due to failed cell cycle exit, a possibility because the PACAP rescue of reduced neurite outgrowth was accompanied by inhibition of proliferation. Rather, treatment with another anti-mitogen, FGF2, did not rescue the differentiation defect, but in fact attenuated IGF1-stimulated neuritogenesis in both genotypes. Significantly, GNP survival was also not compromised in the absence of En2, nor was growth factor-induced trophism. In aggregate, these data suggest that a complex array of mitogenic, trophic and differentiative signals within the EGL act in concert with cell-autonomous gene expression (i.e., En2 expression) to execute GNP maturation. Previous evidence indicates that multiple interactions of intrinsic and extrinsic signals control GNP proliferation. With regard to extrinsic signals, we previously found that PACAP inhibits Shh-induced GNP mitosis by upregulating adenylate cyclase, whereas others show similar roles for bone morphogenetic proteins via Smad. Conversely, in the current study, we find IGF1 and Shh synergistically stimulate DNA synthesis. Furthermore, interactions between intrinsic signals and growth factors are also known. For example, transcription factor Atoh1/MATH1 expressed in EGL precursors promotes Shh-induced proliferation by regulating expression of downstream target, Gli1. Similar promitogenic effects have been defined for Zic family members, including 1, 2 and 4, as well as ATF5. On the other hand, ZNF238/RP58 is expressed as GNPs exit the cell cycle, and overexpression inhibits proliferation, findings that parallel our observations with En2. Thus, a number of gene-growth factor interactions likely contribute to GNP development. That no other mitogenic or anti-mitogenic signal elicited genotypic differences in En2 KO and WT GNPs suggests there is a specific yet indirect interaction between En2 and IGF1 signaling (Figure 7), with one feature being altered S6K activation. The expression of En2 by GNPs may facilitate their transition from proliferation to differentiation in an environment rich in mitogenic signals, thereby allowing subpopulations of cells to continue cycling while others exit and differentiate. En2 expression has been reported to be greater in the vermis than the hemispheres, which may be one mechanism explaining the delay between vermis and hemisphere GNP proliferation during development.