The claudin-5 bands were analyzed by western blotting using specific antibody from the CSF. (F) Ratios of claudin-5 were decreased significantly (*P<0.05) in GM6001-treated mice versus infected mice. Bars represent mean +- S.D. from three independent experiments performed in duplicate. Correlation between claudin-5 and Evans blue. Evans blue is normally excluded from CSF by an intact blood-CSF barrier but it can enter CSF when the integrity of the blood-CSF barrier is disrupted. This method is often used to assess simple alterations in the blood-CSF barrier. The blood-CSF barrier permeability assays for the mouse CSF after infection with A. cantonensis showed a significant correlation with the degradation of claudin-5 (Figure 4). Correlation between claudin-5 and Evans blue. The claudin-5 levels were significantly correlated (r = 0.95; P<0.05) with Evans blue. Correlation of claudin-5 with CSF eosinophils. CSF eosinophilia was found only in infected mice. The level of claudin-5 was correlated significantly with the eosinophil count in CSF (Figure 5). Correlation of claudin-5 with CSF eosinophils. The level of claudin-5 was correlated significantly (r = 0.76; P<0.05) with CSF eosinophil count, using Spearman's ranking correlation test. Discussion. Infection of mice with A. cantonensis causes brain injury and increased expression of NF-kappaB in the brains of ICR and BALB/c strains of mice. Exposure of human bone marrow endothelial cells to Trypanosoma brucei gambiense induced NF-kappaB translocation to the nucleus and CNS barrier dysfunction. In addition, over-expression of IkappaB-alpha completely blocked NF-kappaB binding to the MMP-9 promoter, demonstrating that NF-kappaB activity mediated expression of MMP-9 in primary rabbit and human dermal fibroblasts. In the present study, significant elevation of p-IkappaB-alpha and p-NF-kappaB was demonstrated in brain samples from mice with eosinophilic meningoencephalitis caused by infection with A. cantonensis. Mice treated with MG132 had decreased NF-kappaB phosphorylation and MMP-9 production in eosinophilic meningoencephalitis. These results demonstrate the correlation between NF-kappaB phosphorylation and MMP-9 activity during infection with A. cantonensis. HIV-1 envelope glycoprotein gp120 can reduce BBB integrity and disrupt tight junction proteins (occludin and claudin-5) by MMP-9 in brain vascular endothelial cells. Also, amyloid-beta decreases expression of claudin-5, increases activities of MMP-2, -9, causes BBB leakage and promotes BBB permeability in humans with cerebral amyloid angiopathy. Treatment with MMP-9 chelator GM6001 can reverse disruption of claudin-5 and BBB permeability in brain edema of mice with acute liver failure. Additionally, MMPs contributed to the inflammatory breakdown of the blood-CSF barrier in porcine choroids plexus epithelial cells. MMP-12 might have an important role in the degradation of elastin and participate in the breakdown of blood-CSF barrier in mice with eosinophilic meningoencephalitis caused by A. cantonensis . These studies demonstrated that MMPs might be associated with the disruption of brain barrier during inflammation. In this study, we showed that the degradation of claudin-5 is correlated significantly with blood-CSF barrier permeability. In addition, the degradation of claudin-5 was reduced significantly when mice were treated with GM6001 and A. cantonensis-induced disruption of blood-CSF barrier was prevented by treatment with this MMP inhibitor. These results demonstrate that A. cantonensis can activate MMP-9 and leukocyte-derived MMP-9 can contribute to tight junction damage and impairment of the blood-CSF barrier. Tight junctions control the paracellular permeability of epithelial cells and dysregulated permeability is associated with inflammatory diseases. In a cell model for blood-CSF barrier consisting of porcine choroid plexus epithelial cells infected with Streptococcus suis, which causes bacterial meningitis, the bacteria induced loss of blood-CSF barrier function and might facilitate trafficking of leukocytes across the barrier. There are two possible routes to explain a traversal mechanism during bacterial meningitis: (1) leukocyte infiltration-directed transcellular migration; and (2) leukocytes crossing the barrier by paracellular migration. In this study, we demonstrated that claudin-5 was decreased in brain and increased in CSF of mice with angiostrongyliasis meningoencephalitis. Reduction of claudin-5 implies increased blood-CSF barrier permeability and leukocyte migration across the blood-CSF barrier in choroid plexus after infection with A. cantonensis. We suggest that leukocytes migrate across the blood-CSF barrier via the paracellular route and subsequently reach inflammatory space in mice infected with A. cantonensis. Therefore, the traversal mechanism of leukocytes across blood-CSF barrier could depend on the type of pathogen. The claudin family, integral components of tight junctions, are responsible for determining the permeability of paracellular transport within epithelial cell layers. The present study showed that MMP-9 might contribute to the degradation of claudin-5 in the blood-CSF barrier. MMP-9 production was correlated with claudin-5 degradation and blood-CSF barrier permeability in angiostrongyliasis meningoencephalitis. Therefore, we propose a possible mechanism (Fig. 6) to explain the contribution of MMP-9 to blood-CSF barrier permeability. In mice infected with A. cantonensis, the parasite-induced eosinophilia and inflammation might lead to the induction of the phosphorylation levels of IkappaB-alpha and NF-kappaB. The activation of IkappaB-alpha and NF-kappaB could upregulate MMP-9 production. Blocking IkappaB-alpha and NF-kappaB signaling by MG132 could reduce MMP-9 production. Further, blocking MMP-9 activity by GM6001 could reduce claudin-5 degradation and blood-CSF barrier permeability during angiostrongyliasis meningoencephalitis. MMP-9 could cause claudin-5 degradation and promote leukocyte infiltration into CSF via the paracellular route during infection with A. cantonensis in mouse choroid plexus.