A growing body of evidence suggested its involvement in key processes underling human pathologies. The objective of this article is to review the current knowledge of CyPA regarding its potential role in several human diseases in order to offer novel therapeutic strategies. CyPA and Cardiovascular Disease. Vascular remodeling. It has become clear that increases in reactive oxygen species (ROS) and inflammation represent key pathogenic mechanisms for vascular disease. For example, ROS have been implicated in the pathogenesis of neointima formation in part by promoting VSMC growth as well as stimulating pro-inflammatory events. In light of the major importance of CyPA in those aspect closely related to vascular remodeling, we analyzed the response to complete carotid ligation in wild-type (WT) mice, CyPA knockout (CyPA-/-) mice, and mice overexpressing CyPA specifically in VSMC (termed VSMC-Tg). Analysis of ligated arteries revealed that the intimal area as well as medial and adventitial thickening were significantly lower in CyPA-/- mice and significantly enhanced in VSMC-Tg mice versus WT mice. Interestingly, there was a significant decrease in the recruitment of inflammatory cells in ligated arteries of CyPA-/- mice and a significant increase in VSMC-Tg mice (approximately twofold) compared with WT mice. In addition, extracellular signal-regulated kinase 1/2 (ERK1/2) activation and Ki67+ cells were consistently decreased in CyPA-/- mice after carotid ligation. These data strengthen the link between CyPA expression and VSMC proliferation and suggest that VSMC-derived CyPA is important for the recruitment of inflammatory cells. Abdominal aortic aneurysm (AAA). Inflammation has long been known to contribute to the pathogenesis of AAA. More than a decade ago, it was shown that treatment with CsA attenuated the formation of AAA in the rat model of elastase infusion. The authors of that study pointed out that the immunosuppressive effects of CsA would probably preclude its use in patients with aneurysms. We have recently demonstrated that deletion of CyPA in mice prevents the formation of AAA in response to infusion of angiotensin II (Ang II). Importantly, mice lacking CyPA were completely protected against aortic rupture leading to sudden death. Mechanistic studies revealed that deletion of CyPA reduces aortic inflammation, oxidative stress, and matrix degradation (Figure 1). In a series of experiments involving bone marrow (BM) transplantation, as well as experiments in which CyPA was selectively overexpressed in VSMC, we showed that expression of CyPA in VSMC, rather than BM-derived cells, is crucial to the development of AAA. Finally, to demonstrate its relevance to human aneurysmal disease, we showed that Ang II caused the release of CyPA and the activation of metalloproteinase 2 (MMP-2) in VSMC derived from human AAA. Recently, Prins et al. found that benzo[a]pyrene potentiates the pathogenesis of AAA by increasing CyPA expression. Furthermore, simvastatin-treated patients with AAA exhibited lower CyPA mRNA, as well as CyPA intracellular protein levels. Thus, the interference with signaling pathways leading to CyPA may reveal a new strategy in the treatment of AAA. Atherosclerosis. One of the major causes of AAA is atherosclerosis, a disease characterized by chronic inflammation of the arterial wall. Based on the premise that atherosclerosis stimulates AAA, we hypothesized that CyPA would necessarily have a significant impact on atherosclerosis development. We have characterized five important pathological mechanisms by which CyPA promotes atherosclerosis (Figure 2). First, CyPA stimulates low-density lipoprotein (LDL) uptake in the vessel wall by regulating the expression of scavenger receptors. Second, CyPA increases EC activation and inflammation by increasing vascular cell adhesion molecule 1 (VCAM-1) expression. Third, CyPA decreases endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) expression through kruppel-like factor 2 (KLF2) transcriptional repression in EC. Fourth, CyPA is a key determinant for tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-alpha)-induced EC apoptosis. Finally, CyPA stimulates recruitment of inflammatory cells derived from the BM to the aortic wall. Thus, CyPA may have an important role in several stages of atherosclerosis. This observation is also supported by recent papers suggesting that CyPA is involved in the early phase of atherosclerosis by regulating fatty streak formation, and later phases by affecting plaque rupture and thrombosis that complicate the disease. Based on the literature reported above, it is now clear that CyPA is a crucial mediator of vascular remodeling, AAA, and atherosclerosis, three diseases that share common pathways (Figure 3). Cardiac diseases. Inflammation triggered by oxidative stress is the cause of many human cardiac diseases including hypertrophy, myocardial ischemia, and coronary artery disease. Considering the role of CyPA in inflammation and ROS generation, we studied CyPA functions in heart disease. In particular, we evaluated the role of CyPA in Ang II-induced cardiac hypertrophy. Interestingly, mice lacking CyPA exhibited significantly less Ang II-induced cardiac hypertrophy. Most importantly, we proved that CyPA is required for Ang II-mediated cardiac hypertrophy by directly potentiating ROS production, stimulating the proliferation and migration of cardiac fibroblasts, and promoting cardiac myocyte hypertrophy. In addition, May and coworkers demonstrated that CyPA is involved in myocardial ischemia and reperfusion injury. Emerging data suggested that CyPA might be a valuable marker for predicting the severity of acute coronary syndromes. Yan et al. reported that serum CyPA concentration in unstable angina and acute myocardial infarction subjects are significantly higher than those in patients with stable angina and controls. This study was confirmed by Satoh et al. that found that plasma levels of CyPA correlated with the anatomical severity of stable coronary artery disease. In summary, CyPA is a critical determinant of cardiac hypertrophy, myocardial ischemia, and reperfusion injury and may be a helpful biomarker of coronary artery disease. CyPA and Diabetes. Recently, Ramachandran et al. presented evidence for a significant role of CyPA in the pathogenesis of diabetes. They performed a proteomic analysis of high glucose-primed monocytes, and identified CyPA as a potential secretory marker of inflammation in type 2 diabetes. Specifically, they reported that CyPA expression is reduced in circulating monocytes from patients with type 2 diabetes. In addition, they found that the levels of CyPA in plasma samples of patients with diabetes and coronary artery disease are higher in comparison with plasma obtained from healthy volunteers. These data suggested that CyPA secreted from monocytes could be an important pro-inflammatory stimulus for vascular inflammation in patients with diabetes. CyPA and Viral Infection. CyPA and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV-1). CyPA has been extensively studied from the gene to protein level during HIV-1 infection. CyPA is encoded by the peptidyl prolyl isomerase A (PPIA) gene, and regulatory PPIA polymorphisms were found to be a component of genetic susceptibility to HIV-1 infection or disease progression. In addition, analysis of sera from HIV-1-infected individuals has revealed higher protein concentrations of CyPA (about fourfold) compared with sera of healthy controls. Interestingly, HIV-1 replication was decreased in human CD4+ T cells when CyPA was knocked out. Molecular insights have revealed that CyPA can interact with HIV capsid proteins (CA domain). Furthermore, CyPA interacts with HIV accessory proteins, such as the viral protein R (Vpr) and Nef to facilitate a step in the viral life cycle between penetration and reverse transcription. Recently, it has been reported that CyPA in dendritic cells could recognize the newly synthesized HIV-1 CA domain and subsequently prompt an interferon type I (IFN-I) response through activation of IRF3. Therefore, packaging of host CyPA into HIV particles is an important step in HIV morphogenesis and essential for HIV replication. CyPA and hepatitis virus. Similar to HIV-1, several lines of evidence indicate that CyPA positively regulates the replication of hepatitis C virus (HCV). Knockdown of endogenous CyPA significantly hampered HCV RNA replication and viral protein expression. Molecular studies provided evidence that CyPA enhances the replication of HCV by binding to the non-structural 5A (NS5A) and NS5B protein of HCV. CyPA is also important for hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection. Higher serum CyPA levels were detected in chronic hepatitis B patients than in healthy individuals. Studies on molecular mechanisms regulating HBV replication showed that CyPA interacts with the small surface proteins (SHBs) of the HBV surface antigen (HBsAg). It was hypothesized that CyPA binds to SHBs and is secreted along with HBsAg particles. Thus, CyPA may function as a cell-intrinsic sensor able to recognize HCV and HBV proteins in order to promote viral infection and replication. CyPA and influenza A virus. CyPA was found in the core of the influenza virion and was upregulated upon infection by avian H9N2 influenza virus in AGS cells (a human gastric carcinoma cell line). Liu et al. revealed that overexpression of CyPA blocked influenza A virus replication, whereas the depletion of endogenous CyPA resulted in enhanced production of influenza A virus. Furthermore, CyPA was found to interact with the matrix protein 1 (M1) affecting the early stage of viral replication. Finally, CyPA was able to restrict influenza virus replication through accelerating degradation of the M1 protein. CyPA and other viruses. It was reported that vaccinia virus (VV) infection led to an impressive increase in CyPA stability and CyPA is incorporated into the virus particle during morphogenesis. In addition, CyPA was found to act as a chaperone for the nucleocapsid protein of the vesicular stomatitis virus (VSV). CyPA was also reported to regulate severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus (SARS-CoV) replication through binding to the nucleocapsid protein and incorporation into particles. Then, it was shown that CyPA is required for the host IFN-I response in rotavirus (RV) infection of MA104 cells. Finally, Keyes et al. demonstrated that CyPA expression is an important factor in human cytomegalovirus (HCMV) infection and reactivation. In light of the major importance of CyPA in the regulation of infectivity and replication of several viruses, it is worth proposing CyPA as target for anti-viral therapy. Protozoan Parasites. An emerging body of literature is reporting CyPA importance in the growth of protozoan parasites affecting humans. It has been suggested that the mammalian host cell CyPA seems to be involved in the intracellular replication cycle of Leishmania major parasites, as CyPA siRNA interference or CsA reduced the parasite burden. Some of the small CyPs from Plasmodium falciparum and Toxoplasma gondii (i.e. TgCyP18) have shown similar inhibitory profiles as those established for the human CyPA. The involvement of CyPA in protozoan parasite growth was also supported by the fact that CsA has anti-parasitic activity against a wide variety of parasites with the exception of Leishmania. CyPA and Cancer. Upregulation of CyPA. There is now an established body of knowledge about the role of CyPA in cancer. Indeed, various reports have shown that CyPA is upregulated in cancer and is a key determinant for malignant transformation and metastasis. In small cell lung cancer, overexpressed CyPA stimulates cancer cell growth, whereas CyPA knockdown slows down cancer cell growth. CyPA is involved in diverse pathological processes of cancer development. Specifically, it has been reported that overexpressed CyPA in many cancers: (1) helps cancer proliferation, (2) regulates cell cycle progression, (3) blocks apoptosis, and (4) promotes cell migration/invasion. Interestingly, CyPA expression is influenced by chemotherapeutic agents. For example, treatment with anti-cancer drugs such as 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine, celecoxib, and 5-fluorouracil, decreases CyPA expression in cancer cells. Moreover, CsA and sanglifehrin A (SfA), the two immunosuppressive drugs that bind CyPA, increase the chemotherapeutic effect of cisplatin in glioblastoma multiforme. Transcriptional regulation of CyPA. Recently, upregulation of CyPA in cancers was reported to be controlled by p53 and HIF1alpha (Figure 4), two critical transcription factors for cancer development. It was shown that CyPA protein is upregulated by p53-induced apoptotic conditions and CyPA may also confer p53 stability through its PPIase activity. However, overexpressed CyPA inhibits hypoxia- and cisplatin-induced cell death in a p53- independent manner. Furthermore, it was found that, under hypoxic conditions, CyPA, whose promoter contains the hypoxia response element (HRE) motif, can be induced by HIF1alpha. Thus, the regulatory relations of CyPA with p53 and HIF1alpha may present a new insight in understanding CyPA function during cancer development. Drug resistance. Choi et al. also found that CyPA overexpression decreases cisplatin-induced cell death, whereas CyPA knockdown lower cell survival rates. These results suggested that CyPA overexpression may lead to drug resistance, which results in a bad outcome of chemotherapy. Subsequent oligo-microarray analysis by Yu and collaborators revealed that CyPA can upregulate the expression of many cytokine and drug resistance-related genes including drug metabolism and drug transport-related genes. Some of these genes, such as IL-6, multidrug resistance-associated protein 2 (MRP2), MRP3, microsomal glutathione S-transferase 1 (MGST1), and glutathione transferase zeta 1 (GSTZ1), may contribute to drug resistance. In addition, CyPA promoted the expression of many ATP-binding cassette (ABC) transporters, which are able to reduce cellular drug accumulation and consequently induce drug resistance. It was also observed that liver cells stably expressing CyPA (SK-Hep1-CyPA) show an increased resistance for the anti-cancer drugs doxorubicin and vincristine. Also, the accumulation of doxorubicin was reduced in SK-Hep1-CyPA cells. These data suggest that the elevated expression of CyPA may contribute to clinical resistance to chemotherapy. In vivo studies. A report on CyPA in non-small-cell lung cancer revealed that CyPA knockdown has a significant effect on tumor growth in vivo. Two non-small-cell lung cancer cell lines, 5M2 and LC-103H, stably transfected with pSUPER-CyPA RNAi were grown as xenografts in severe combined immunodeficient (SCID) mice, and CyPA knockdown cells yielded slower-growing tumors than the cells transfected with scrambled RNAi. This effect was confirmed by overexpressing CyPA in the small airway epithelial cell line, S1LEK3. These cells resulted in faster growing xenografts in SCID mice compared with cells transfected with the empty vector. Large tumors were observed in the CyPA-overexpressing group, whereas none was observed in the vector group. Other interesting data by Li et al. revealed that intra-tumor injection of Pgenesil-2-CypA-shRNA decreases tumor development in nude mice. These data indicated that CyPA suppression by shRNA could significantly decrease tumor growth in vivo, with no apparent toxicity at the dose used. CyPA and Nervous System Degeneration. Alzheimer disease. A growing body of evidence suggests oxidative stress involvement in neurodegenerative diseases. In addition, many papers showed the contribution of CyPA in oxidative stress mediated-diseases. Recently Bell et al. reported the involvement of CyPA in Alzheimer disease. In particular, they showed that astrocyte-derived human ApoE4 leads to an age-dependent progressive blood-brain barrier (BBB) breakdown (Figure 5). This event is driven by CyPA that initiates a pro-inflammatory pathway activating nuclear factor kappa B (NF-kappaB) and MMP-9. The activation of this pro-inflammatory pathway in brain capillary pericytes determines the release of neurotoxic molecules from the vessels, damaging neurons and affecting their synaptic connections.