DDR is activated in response to DNA injuries. Depending on the type and the extent of damage, DDR can drive cells into apoptosis or senescence, or allows cell survival by activating specific mechanisms such as DNA repair or DNA damage tolerance. The proteins involved in these signaling pathways (Figure 2 and Table 1) are hierarchically classified into three categories: sensor and mediator proteins that recognize the lesion and generate the activation signal; transducer proteins that relay and amplify the initiated signal, and finally effector proteins that connect the signal activation with the cell cycle machinery. The signal transduction pathways of the DDR that promotes cell cycle arrest during ongoing DNA synthesis will be designed as DNA Replication Checkpoint. At the apex of the DDR are three kinases belonging to the phosphatidylinositol-3-OH kinase (PI3K or PIKK) family: ATM (Ataxia Telangiectasia Mutated), ATR (ATM-and Rad3-related) and DNA-PK (DNA-dependent protein kinase). In addition, the Poly (ADP-Ribose) Polymerase-1 (PARP-1) enzyme also appears to play a key role at the earliest step of DNA damage signaling ( for review). DNA double-strand breaks activate PARP-1, ATM and DNA-PK, while ATR is mostly involved in monitoring DNA replication stress and other types of DNA damage. Once activated, these kinases phosphorylate a conserved motif S/TQ on their substrates. A genome-wide approach has identified as many as seven hundred potential substrates of these kinases. It is interesting to note that until very recently, ATR, and not ATM, has been considered to be an essential gene for viability in human and murine cells. However, more recent data now show that also ATM is required for embryonic development. The ATR-dependent replication checkpoint pathway constitutes a crucial barrier required to prevent propagation of mutated-DNA. Hence, identifying which specific structures activate ATR, and characterizing in-depth all the mechanisms underlying this specific signaling pathway, appears like a key step in understanding maintenance of genetic stability. In the rest of this review, we will focus on the role and function of ATR activation at stalled replication forks, which constitutes the core of the replication checkpoint. Schematic representation of the replication checkpoint pathway activated following DNA damage. DNA damage generated onto the DNA induces activation and/or relocalization of sensor and mediator proteins triggering a phosphorylation cascade (downwards arrows) that in turn activates soluble, as well as chromatin-bound, transducers and effector proteins resulting in cell cycle delay. Once the damage has been repaired signaling is inactivated by dephosphorylation (backwards arrows). FPC stands for Fork Protection Complex and includes Timeless, Claspin and Tipin proteins. List of proteins implicated in replication checkpoint activation from yeast to human. Question marks indicate possible homologous genes or those not yet identified homologous. Species Gene name  H. sapiens   X. laevis   D. melanogaster   C. elegans   Yeast (S. cerevisiae/S. pombe)  ATR ATR ATR Mei-41 atl-1 Mec1 S.c/Rad3 S.p. ATRIP ATRIP ATRIP mus 304 ATRIP Ddc2/ATRIP TopBP1 TopBP1 TopBP1 mus 101 mus 101 Dbp11/Cut5 Rad9 Rad9 Rad9 Rad9 Hrp-9 Ddc1/Rad9 Rad1 Rad1 Rad1 Rad1/Dmel mrt-2 Rad17 Hus1 Hus1 Hus1 hus1 hus-1 Mec3/Hus1 Rad17 Rad17 Rad17 Rad17 hrp-17 Rad24/Rad17 Claspin Claspin Claspin Claspin F25H5.5  Mrc1/Mrc1 Timeless Timl Tim 1 Tim tim-1 Tof1/Swi1 Tipin Tipin Tipin Timeout  ? Csm3/Swi3 CHK1 CHK1 CHK1 grp1/DChk1 CHK1 Chk1/Rad27 CDC25A CDC25A CDC25A String CDC-25 CDC25 . 5. The Replication Checkpoint. 5.1. The S-Phase and Intra S-Phase Checkpoint. Progression of DNA synthesis is continuously monitored by these sensing pathways that ensure both coordination of S-phase with other cell cycle phases as well as control over firing of additional replication origins. The function of the S-phase checkpoint is to delay the cell cycle, such as G1/S transition and G2/M through down regulation of CDK activity, mainly CDK2 and/or CDK1. The function of the intra-S phase checkpoint is to slow down DNA synthesis and to inhibit additional origin firing (mainly late origin firing), to facilitate DNA repair and as such avoid duplication of DNA discontinuities. Probably, the best example of activation of the replication checkpoint is when cells experience DNA damage, or nucleotides starvation, when entering S-phase. Since the G1 to S-phase transition relies upon the activation of CDKs and DDKs kinases, activation of the replication checkpoint results in inhibition of these two kinases. In yeast, the checkpoint kinase Rad53 has been shown to phosphorylate DBF4 and SLD3 and by consequence to inhibit further origin firing. Inactivation of CDK2 is well described and relies upon rapid proteasomal degradation of CDC25A, a phosphatase that removes an inhibitory phosphorylation on CDK2 (see Section 3.2). In the presence of very low levels of CDC25A, CDK2/Cyclin E remains in an inactive form thus blocking S-phase entry and/or activation of additional origins. ATM and ATR can also phosphorylate DDKs, in particular CDC7/DBF4. However, the effect of checkpoint activation on the kinase activity of this complex is controversial. Previous work has shown that activation of the intra S-phase checkpoint inactivates CDC7, by dissociation of DBF4 from chromatin. This conclusion has been recently challenged and very recent results in both budding yeast and mammalian cells suggest that ATM/ATR-dependent phosphorylation of CDC7 does not affect its kinase activity, which is important to inhibit rereplication within S-phase. In sum, these results suggest that, while in the absence of damage, phosphorylation of CDC7/Dbf4 by CDKs is important for origin activation, ATM/ATR-dependent phosphorylation inhibits DNA synthesis and/or origin firing during the DNA damage response although the kinase activity of CDC7/DBF4 appears to be essential to prevent replication fork collapse. 5.2. Generation of ssDNA after DNA Damage or Replicative Stress. The most common ATR activation signal involves all processes interfering with DNA replication fork progression, a situation also known as replication stress. Replication stress can be induced by DNA damage or by inhibition of replicative DNA polymerases activity, either using hydroxyurea (HU) that deplete the cellular pool of deoxyribonucleotides or using aphidicolin, a competitive inhibitor of DNA polymerases. Certain types of DNA damage can induce replication stress since they alter the three dimensional structure of the DNA helix (such as UV, cisplatin, camptothecin amongst others). As a consequence, DNA polymerase activity is reduced but not that of the helicase, since it can translocate through such lesions. In these situations, a functional uncoupling between the enzymatic activities of both DNA polymerases and helicase occurs (Figure 3). The result of this process is the production of excess ssDNA, a process commonly known as replication fork uncoupling. Replication stress that produces an excess of ssDNA results in an increased level of the major ssDNA binding protein RPA bound onto chromatin. Curiously, in S. cerevisiae, cells treated with HU only generate a very limited amount of ssDNA (up to 200 nucleotides per replication fork). In contrast in metazoans, the length of ssDNA at stalled replication fork is much higher and can reach several kilobases. The functional and molecular bases of this difference are to date unknown. Other types of DNA damage, such as interstrand cross-links, physically inhibit the helicase and by consequence also block the activity of DNA polymerases, since ssDNA formation is reduced, resulting in replication fork stall without immediate production of excess ssDNA. However, a limited amount of ssDNA can be generated at forks stalled by DSBs following their processing (resection) by the coordinated action of nucleases, DNA helicases and associated proteins ( for review). Resection is initiated by the Mre11, Rad50, Nbs1 complex (MRN) and the Sae2/Ctlp/Ctp1 endonucleases in a 5'-3' direction in a process that requires CDK activity. More extensive resection occurs upon recruitment of the endonuclease EXO1 (MUS81-EME1, in fission yeast), the RecQ/Sgs1/BLM helicase and the DNA2 endonuclease. DSB resection generates RPA-coated ssDNA that in turns further stimulates this process. CtIP has been shown to be also a necessary actor in the DSB resection in cooperating with MRN complex for full ATR activation. Other findings have shed light on a distinct mechanism of how an ATR-dependent DNA damage response is mediated by Apurinic/apyrimidinic endonuclease 2 (APE2) in the oxidative stress response. APE2 promote recruitment of ATR, ATRIP, and Rad9 to damage sites and thus participates in oxidative stress-induced Chk1 phosphorylation. Schematic representation of two different types of replication stress. (A) Progression of a replication fork is represented by leading and lagging strand DNA polymerases (yellow circles) tethered to the helicase (in green) by the fork protection complex (in blue). In the presence of inhibitors of replicative DNA polymerases or DNA distorting lesions (red stars), polymerases stall while the helicase continues to unwind DNA producing an excess of unreplicated ssDNA that constitutes the primary substrate for checkpoint signaling. (B) Other DNA lesions, such as interstrand crosslinks produced by mitomycin C, or specialized DNA and/or chromatin structures, and perhaps proteins bound to DSBs, primary halt the progression of the helicase and stall DNA polymerases since ssDNA is not immediately produced. This can be produced at a later time as a result of resection of a DSB. Double strand breaks are thought to induce replication fork collapse since the replisome would just unload from the DNA. Although this is the case in vitro on naked DNA, double strand breaks in vivo are likely bound by specific proteins, such as ATM and the MRN complex for instance, which may in principle constitute a barrier to the progression of the helicase, thus resulting in stalling of the replication fork without production of excess ssDNA. Interestingly, a physical direct interaction between ATM and PCNA has been recently reported in mammalian cells. 5.3. Basic Model for ATR Activation at Stalled Replication Forks. The current model for ATR activation assumes that ATR is recruited onto ssDNA via an interaction with its cofactor ATRIP (ATR-Interacting Protein) and RPA. ATR associates with ATRIP in a stable stoichiometric complex independently of DNA damage. ATRIP binds directly to RPA-coated ssDNA, and is thought to target ATR at sites of replicative stress or DNA damage. After induction of damage, ATR and ATRIP are located in DNA damage nuclear foci and, in human cells, formation of these foci is inhibited when the expression of RPA is downregulated by RNA interference. In addition, down regulation of RPA also result in inhibition of checkpoint activation. These findings have led to the proposal that nucleation of RPA onto ssDNA generated at stalled forks is a key determinant of checkpoint activation. However, more recent data in Xenopus egg extracts show that recruitment of excess RPA at stalled forks is dispensable for S-phase checkpoint activation, while generation of ssDNA is absolutely required. These results are consistent with previous observations in mammalian cells showing that RPA is not quantitatively required for checkpoint activation and that, in yeast, an RPA mutant that cannot interact with the checkpoint clamp 9-1-1 complex (see below) is still checkpoint proficient. Finally, an ATRIP mutant that cannot interact with RPA was also shown to normally activate the checkpoint in mammalian cells. In addition to its participation in checkpoint activation, RPA is primarily required for the establishment of replication forks (see Section 2.3). Thus, without RPA, replication forks cannot be made and therefore ssDNA is not stabilized. Hence, it is very likely that removal of RPA from the cell mainly inhibits checkpoint activation indirectly:by inhibiting DNA synthesis (see below):an issue that was not previously fully taken into account. Interestingly, some of us have shown that reduced levels of RPA induce formation of excess ssDNA and ATR activation, and that in S-phase, ssDNA is not processed by exonucleolytic activities. This is not surprising knowing that many other ssDNA binding proteins exist in the cell that may protect ssDNA from cleavage. It is thus unlikely that in the presence of low levels of RPA, ssDNA is present under naked, unprotected form in the cell. However, this substrate may be unstable in mitosis, when cells attempt to segregate chromosomes with underreplicated DNA, since it can fuel recombination-based mechanisms, as previously proposed. Based on these observations, some of us predicted that hypomorphic mutations in RPA or other replication proteins might be a source of replication stress that can trigger genomic instability. In line with this possibility, a hypomorphic mutation in RPA was previously shown to induce genetic instability and fuel lymphoma in mice, and recently, genomic instability has been observed also in human cells in which RPA is limiting. In this report, ATR is also suggested to be important to limit formation of ssDNA upon replication stress, by inhibiting firing of dormant origins (see Section 5.6). Activation of ATR kinase activity requires recruitment of important ATR activators, the checkpoint clamp Rad9-Hus1-Rad1 (9-1-1 complex) and TopBP1. The heterotrimeric 9-1-1 complex is loaded at stalled replication forks in a similar manner to PCNA, which is loaded by RF-C, except that loading of this checkpoint clamp complex involves an RF-C-like complex in which the largest subunit of RF-C (RFC1) is replaced by Rad17 (RFCRad17). It has been demonstrated that binding of the 9-1-1 complex requires the presence of a 5'-end at the junction between double and ssDNA. Interestingly, although the recruitment of the 9-1-1 complex and ATR onto chromatin are independent and both necessary for full ATR activation, an in vitro study in S. cerevisiae suggests a direct interaction between the C-terminal part of Ddc1 with Mec1 (respectively RAD9 and ATR homologues in S. cerevisiae, see Table 1). TopBP1 is a large, multi-functional protein, playing an essential role in both DNA synthesis and checkpoint activation. These functions of TopBP1 come under separable domains: the N-terminal domain is necessary for activation of DNA synthesis, while the C-terminal domain is required for checkpoint activation. Although TopBP1 function appears not to be essential during ongoing DNA synthesis, this protein is found associated with unperturbed replication forks and may stimulate ATR activity by local specific protein-protein interactions during replication fork progression to coordinate the temporal order of origins firing. Several additional interactions have been described for TopBP1 in replication checkpoint. Interaction between the phosphorylated tail of Rad9 (on serine 387) with BRCT repeats I and II of TopBP1 and another interaction between TopBP1 with ATR-ATRIP through a specific domain known as ATR-Activation Domain or AAD localize TopoBP1 for ATR activation. Recruitment of high levels of 9-1-1 on chromatin require TopBP1 and stabilization of TopBP1 at stalled forks has been shown to be also dependent upon the DNA helicase FANCJ/BACH1. Finally, interaction between TopBP1 and the MDC1 (Mediator of the checkpoint 1) protein has been shown to be important for Chk1 phosphorylation after replication stress. Recently, the MRN complex has also been implicated in ATR activation through stabilization of TopBP1 and this function appears to depend upon its catalytic activity. Altogether, these findings highlight a complex structural network of interactions mediated by TopBP1 whose function in the context of the stalled replication forks will be very interesting to elucidate in the future. Previous observations have proposed a role for DNA synthesis in ATR activation. DNA primase/polymerase activities were shown to be required for ATR activation at stalled replication forks. Since this enzyme is absolutely required to initiate DNA synthesis, these data can be interpreted as an indirect role for DNA polymerase alpha in stimulating replication forks formation. This is well illustrated by the observation that the checkpoint is inactive when initiation of DNA synthesis is inhibited by Geminin. However, a recent study has addressed the requirement of DNA synthesis in DNA replication checkpoint and convincingly showed that continued synthesis and elongation of new DNA primers on ssDNA templates occurs at replication forks stalled with aphidicolin. Since synthesis of these replication intermediates is essential for binding of the 9-1-1 complex, these findings highlight an additional key step in ATR signaling. Formation of ssDNA at arrested forks may be then important to generate replication intermediates that stimulate recruitment of the 9-1-1 complex catalyzed by the RFCRad17 complex. Once loaded, the 9-1-1 checkpoint clamp is tethered to the ATR-ATRIP complex via the TopBP1 C-terminus, thus leading to ATR activation (Figure 4). Nonetheless, it remains unclear what the precise molecular substrates are that allow ATR activation. Recent data suggest that autophosphorylation of ATR is important for its kinase activity. Autophosphorylation appears to be dependent on RPA, 9-1-1, and not TopBP1. A similar model based on autophosphorylation was previously proposed for ATM activation, suggesting a conserved mechanism of activation within the PI3K family. ATM activation has also been shown to require generation of small DNA fragments. Short replication intermediates synthesized onto ssDNA generated at stalled forks would be the equivalent substrate that stimulates ATR activation (see below). Interestingly, ATR can also be activated following processing of a DSB by end-resection (see Section 5.2), but the role of small DNA fragments generated in this process remains to be determined. Alternatively, ATR may be activated in a different manner in specific situations. Speculative model for replication checkpoint activation. Replication fork uncoupling generates excess ssDNA (see Figure 3) that is coated by RPA. On the lagging strand DNA polymerase, alpha and delta replicative polymerases catalyze synthesis of short replication intermediates (priming reaction). It is not yet clear whether these intermediates are also generated on the leading strand, and if this is the case, which is the DNA polymerase implicated (question mark). A strong candidate is the recently identified Primpol enzyme. TLS DNA Pol kappa may be implicated in recruitment of the 9-1-1 complex by stabilization and/or synthesis of short replication intermediates in proximity of the ATR-ATRIP complex thus facilitating interaction via TopBP1. The MRN complex may facilitate the interaction between TopBP1 and ATR by an as yet unknown mechanism. Once activated, ATR may autophosphorylates and phosphorylate chromatin-bound as well as soluble substrate (-P). CHK1 is phosphorylated by ATR (A), and phosphorylation is potentiated via interaction with Mrc1/Claspin within the FPC (B), although this can also occur in the soluble fraction of the nucleus. The green histone on the chromatin represents H2AX. 5.4. Role of Replication Fork Uncoupling and RPA Nucleation onto ssDNA DNA Replication Checkpoint Activation. High levels of RPA and DNA polymerases have been observed in Xenopus at forks stalled with aphidicolin or UV irradiation. This was thought to represent a checkpoint-specific recruitment of RPA. However, more recent data strongly suggest that this may not be the case, since nucleation of neither ATRIP, nor DNA polymerase alpha or RPA appear to be required for checkpoint activation at arrested forks. Moreover, it has been shown that in Xenopus egg extracts, when initiation of DNA synthesis is poisoned by high concentration of aphidicolin, RPA nucleates at unwound forks, but the 9-1-1 clamp does not load and checkpoint activation does not occur. These observations are entirely consistent with the mode of checkpoint activation of the yeast S. cerevisiae that occurs without detectable RPA nucleation at stalled forks. Finally, checkpoint activation occurs spontaneously in Xenopus extracts containing a limited amount of RPA that do not support its hyperloading at replication forks arrested with aphidicolin. In this situation, DNA synthesis is somehow slow and nuclei accumulate high level of ssDNA, suggesting spontaneous replication fork uncoupling. Chronic checkpoint activation has also been observed in yeast Ctf-4 mutants that are defective in the coupling between DNA polymerases and MCM2-7 helicase, as well as in mutants of the Mrc1 gene, a subunit of the Fork Protection Complex (FPC, see Section 5.5). Taken together, these observations strongly suggest that the basic feature of replication checkpoint activation, conserved from yeast to vertebrate, is the uncoupling of DNA synthesis regardless of the length of the ssDNA produced. Hence primed ssDNA generated at stalled forks may be the natural substrate that facilitates formation of the ATR-ATRIP-9-1-1-TopBP1 complex leading to ATR full activation (Figure 4). This process constitutes a fine-tuning mechanism that efficiently senses progression of S-phase leading to various degrees of checkpoint activation, depending on the extent of replication fork uncoupling. Furthermore, it does not require a specific loading of DNA polymerase alpha, TopBP1 or RPA onto chromatin, since these proteins are already bound at the replication forks during a normal S-phase, and recycle onto ssDNA after completion of their catalytic activity. ATR itself binds to chromatin in a replication-dependent manner in the absence of replication stress. This model is also consistent with observations in both yeast and mammalian cells that colocalization of checkpoint sensors is a minimal sufficient requirement for checkpoint activation even in the absence of external damage. The question remains of whether primed ssDNA is also made on the leading strand at arrested forks, and if this is the case, which of the DNA polymerase fulfills this task. An elegant study in E. coli has previously shown that the DNA damage tolerance system that involves translesion DNA polymerases is required to resume DNA synthesis at replication forks arrested by a DNA lesion generated by the carcinogen AAF, which is consistent with the observation that primer DNA synthesis continues at arrested forks in Xenopus egg extracts. Recent work has provided evidence that one of these enzymes, TLS Pol kappa, is involved in DNA synthesis at arrested forks in eukaryotic cells, in particular when forks are blocked with aphidicolin, since translesion DNA polymerases are not sensitive to this drug. TLS pol kappa was shown to facilitate binding of the 9-1-1 complex at arrested forks, probably by direct physical interaction and, therefore, contributing to full Chk1 phosphorylation. 5.5. Cellular Responses to ATR Activation. Mediators and Transducers of the S-Phase Checkpoint. ATR activated at arrested forks phosphorylates various substrates to coordinate cell cycle arrest, maintenance of replication fork stability, origin firing and eventually fork restart. ATR phosphorylates soluble substrates as well as chromatin bound substrates (Figure 2 and Figure 4). Probably the best ATR characterized chromatin-bound substrate is the histone variant H2AX, known as gammaH2AX. Phosphorylation of H2AX occurs by ATR after replication stress induced by aphidicolin, hydroxyurea or DNA distorting lesions, such as those induced by UV damage or cisplatin. An important function of H2AX phosphorylation at arrested forks appears to allow recruitment of the checkpoint mediator MDC1. Once recruited, MDC1 would act as a scaffold to recruit additional activated ATR molecules and propagate H2AX phosphorylation over a long distance, producing the characteristic pan nuclear staining observed by immunofluorescence. Amongst other chromatin-bound ATR substrates there are MCM2-7 proteins, although the specific role of their phosphorylations remains unclear. The RPA2 subunit of the RPA complex has also been shown to be phosphorylated by ATR upon replication stress. Recent work has shown that phosphorylation mutants of RPA2 do not interfere with RPA binding to ssDNA and that this post-translational modification is not required for activation of the replication checkpoint in both Xenopus and human in vitro systems. Another study suggests that this modification may be required to resume DNA synthesis facilitating replication fork restart. Other replication substrates include subunits of the ORC complex, DNA polymerase epsilon, the RF-C complex and RPA1. In the future, it will be interesting to determine the role of these specific phosphorylations upon the structure/function of the replisome. Mrc1/Claspin can also be considered as a mediator of the replication checkpoint since mediates the autophosphorylation loop of the CHK1 protein kinase ( and see Section 5.6) by direct interaction. Mrc1/Claspin is also phosphorylated by ATR and this phosphorylation appears to be important in mediating hyperphosphorylation of CHK1. Claspin/Mrc1 associates with two other proteins:Timeless/Tof1/Swi1 and Tipin/Swi3/Csm3:forming the Fork Protection Complex (FPC) that supports CHK1 phosphorylation. FPC is bound to chromatin also during the unperturbed cell cycle and mutation in Mrc1 in yeast induce chronic replication fork uncoupling in the absence of external damage, suggesting an important role of FPC in coordinating helicase and DNA polymerases activities. Consistent with this conclusion, subunits of the FPC have been found to interact with MCM2-7 proteins and RPA. Interestingly it has been shown that Claspin binding to chromatin is not essential for CHK1 phosphorylation in Xenopus egg extracts, showing that both chromatin-bound and nuclear-soluble forms of the Claspin-CHK1 complex can exist and be functional.