Here, we show that sCLU is up-regulated at a transcription level during both RS and SIPS, but is not elevated in response to oncogene-induced senescence. This is consistent with prior findings in the literature showing that sCLU was induced in WI-38 cells during RS or after H2O2-induced SIPS. Mechanistically, we also demonstrated that sCLU was induced during senescence through the ATM/IGF-1/IGF-1R/MAPK/Erk-1/2/Egr-1 signaling pathway, a pathway that is also stimulated and regulates sCLU induction during DDR (Figure 6). These results support the observation that cellular senescence processes share significant overlap with DDR pathways. And many key factors (e.g., ATM, p53, p21) that are involved in the DDR in human cells also play important roles in cellular senescence responses. A model of the signaling pathway that mediates sCLU induction during senescence showing the role of sCLU in senescence compared to IGF-1/IGF-1R signaling required to prevent apoptosis. AAI and AG1024 are small molecule chemical inhibitors that inhibit ATM and ATR, and IGF-1 tyrosine kinase receptor (IGF-1R), respectively. Importantly, our data clearly support a role for ATM in the induction of sCLU levels in senescent cells by controlling IGF-1 expression. Upon DNA damage, including uncapped telomere ends of extensive DNA lesions created in SIPS responses, ATM is recruited to the damage site and activated via phosphorylation. Activated ATM, in turn, stimulates several proteins that can mediate DNA damage repair, cause transient growth arrest, and possibly lead to cell death or senescence. Ironically, loss of ATM function sensitizes cells to DNA damage, leading to enhanced cell death and possibly senescence. ATM can be activated by naked telomeres and trigger cellular senescence signaling during RS. Similarly, ATM activation by overwhelming DSB lesions may also lead to senescence signaling during SIPS. However, ATM also plays a protective role in aging and cellular senescence, since ATM-deficient AT cells undergo senescence faster. Consistently, AT patients also age faster. Our finding that ATM up-regulates and controls the IGF-1-sCLU expression axis, as well as sCLU protecting cells from senescence, may help to explain the role of ATM in senescence/aging protection (Figure 6). 