FAK is a signaling molecule that acts as a biosensor that controls cell motility after being activated by various stimuli (Mitra et al.,). Activation of FAK and downstream molecules such as paxillin may contribute to cell proliferation, survival and migration through several different signaling pathways (Natarajan et al.,; Toutounchian et al.,). To investigate the effect on the FAK signaling pathway, FAK, paxillin and AKT proteins were analyzed by western blots after U87-GSCs and primary-GSCs were grown on different concentrations of FN for 72 h. For U87-GSCs grown on 10 mug/mL FN, total expression of FAK and AKT was not affected by carmustine without cilengitide treatment, whereas cilengitide induced significantly lower FAK and AKT expression than that in the untreated 10 mug/mL FN group (Figures 6A,B,E; p < 0.05 for both). Compared to the untreated control, only p-FAK was inhibited significantly by carmustine in U87-GSCs grown in the absence of FN (Figure 6C; p < 0.05), whereas p-paxillin and p-AKT were not suppressed by carmustine in U87-GSCs grown in the absence of FN or grown on 1 mug/mL FN (Figures 6D,F). In contrast, U87-GSCs grown on 5 or 10 mug/mL FN showed significantly restored activation of p-FAK, p-paxillin and p-AKT (Figures 6A,C,D,F; p < 0.05 and p < 0.01, respectively, for both treatments except p-paxillin and 5 mug/mL FN). Moreover, a large-scale decline in p-FAK, p-paxillin and p-AKT occurred with cilengitide treatment (Figures 6A,C,D,F; p < 0.05 for all). For primary-GSCs without carmustine treatment, the expression of p-paxillin and total AKT was not affected by FN (Figures 6D,E). Total FAK was elevated in primary-GSCs grown on 10 mug/mL FN (Figure 6B; p < 0.05), whereas p-FAK was elevated in primary-GSCs grown on 5 or 10 mug/mL FN (p < 0.05 for both); p-AKT was elevated in primary-GSCs grown on 1, 5 or 10 mug/mL FN (p < 0.05 for both). Cilengitide induced markedly lower total FAK and p-AKT expression in cells grown on 10 mug/mL FN than that in the untreated 10 mug/mL FN group (Figures 6A,B,F; p < 0.05 for both). The same trend as observed for U87-GSCs occurred when primary-GSCs were treated with carmustine: Primary-GSCs grown on 5 or 10 mug/mL FN showed significantly restored activation of t-/p-FAK and t-AKT compared to carmustine treated cells in the absence of FN, whereas 10 mug/mL FN restored activation of p-paxillin and p-AKT on a large scale. In addition, a marked decline in t-/p-FAK, p-paxillin and t-/p-AKT occurred with cilengitide treatment (Figures 6A-F; p < 0.05 for all). A schematic diagram shows a mechanism of how FN promotes the malignancy of GSCs in cell adhesion, differentiation, proliferation and chemoresistance via a FAK/paxillin/AKT signaling pathway (Figure 7).