This genomic analysis focuses on the accumulation of genetic variants within the genes instead of individual variants. From our results, we can conclude that suicide is unlikely caused by a single gene, instead, it may be either an umbrella disease-like disorder caused by multiple high-penetrance genes, or it may be determined by the concerted action of multiple genes and the environment. We detected rare genetic variants, which potentially could be the causes of suicide. We emphasize the potential significance of the three calcium ion channel genes (CACNA1B, -1C, and -2D4), which we identified in two different analyses. The CACNA1A, another calcium channel gene, has also been proposed by others as a candidate gene for MDD. This report also identified several candidate genes that have not been associated with any diseases until now. Additionally, our study also revealed that the TGF-beta signalling pathway may play a causative role in the completed suicide (Fig. 1), which is a confirmation of earlier studies that proposed a role for TGF-beta in MDD. Members of the TGF-beta superfamily have been shown to play an important role in the formation of synapses and neural development in invertebrates and in vertebrates as well. Alteration in TGF-beta signalling may also shift the balance of pro-inflammatory and anti-inflammatory cytokines, as proposed in MDD. However, since no other controls (non-suicide MDD patients and non-MDD suicide victims) were used in this study, the identified candidate genes and the TGF-beta signalling pathway may be general genetic factors for the depression or for the suicide, instead of having potential exclusive roles for the completed suicide in MDD patients.The region-dependent accumulation of rare variants dataset was significantly enriched in the genes connected to the TGF-beta pathway. Highlighted are the four genes contained in the dataset. Interactions were drawn using Pathvisio 3.2.4. Of the 201 genes implicated by our analyses, 191 genes had an entry in the STRING database. 88 out of the 191 genes were interconnected; while 20 genes had interactions with experimental evidence forming a network as shown in Figs S1 and S2. The biggest hub in this network was SMAD3.