Meanwhile, IDO1 has been identified as an important component of the proinflammatory, tumor-promoting environment. It has been shown that the expression of IDO1 affects the secretion of various inflammatory cytokines, such as IL-6 and IL-10. IL-6 and its receptor IL-6R, located on the cell membrane, are important inflammatory factors that are responsible for activation of the downstream JAK2/STAT3 pathway. Activation of JAK2 protein kinase catalyzes the phosphorylation of STAT3 protein in the nucleus, thereby regulating the expression of EMT-related genes and other genes. Arpita et al. have indicated that IDO1 may promote tumorigenesis through the enhanced expression of the proinflammatory cytokine IL-6, while the lack of IDO1 or IL-6 expression leads to a decrease in the metastatic tumor burden and an increase in survival. In addition, it has been reported previously that IL-6 can promote cancer cell proliferation, invasion, and stem cell production. In our study, ELISA experiments also confirmed that IDO1 affects the expression of IL-6. Similarly, Luo et al. have found that the IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathway affects EMT. They discovered that polyphyllin I, a natural compound, can reverse EMT by regulating the IL-6/STAT3 signaling pathway in non-small cell lung cancer. Moreover, Zhang et al. have determined that EMT can be regulated in prostate cancer by the ataxia telangiectasia-mutated (ATM) protein kinase/STAT3/PD-L1 signaling pathway and that PD-L1 is significantly reduced when ATM is knocked down. Asgarova et al. also observed upregulated PD-L1 during EMT and described tumor cells' increased proliferation, infiltration, and migration capacities and greater ability to escape immune system detection during EMT. Recent demonstrations showing that adjuvant combined IDO1 inhibitor and PD-L1 inhibitor therapy can greatly improve the effectiveness of immunotherapy suggest that IDO1 and PD-L1 may be closely related. In this context, our findings suggest that they may be linked in the EMT process. Therefore, PD-L1 not only participates in tumor immune evasion but also participates in EMT. Thus, we hypothesized that IDO1 may promote EMT in bladder cancer via the IL-6/STAT3/PD-L1 signaling pathway (Figure 7).